Add pages for new documentation #25 (#26)
metafacture/metafacture-documentation: Fix-User-Guide.md

![logo](https://github.com/culturegraph/metafacture-core/wiki/img/metafacture_small.png)

# Fix User Guide

> This document provides an introduction to the Metafacture Fix language (short: Metafix or Fix). Fix is a declarative flow oriented language in which transformations of arbitrary metadata/semi-structured data can be defined using the FIX language. The  Fix language for Metafacture is introduced as an alternative to configuring data transformations with Metamorph. Inspired by Catmandu Fix, Metafix processes metadata not as a continuous data stream but as discrete records. The basic idea is to rebuild constructs from the (Catmandu) Fix language like functions, selectors and binds in Java and combine with additional functionalities from the Metamorph toolbox.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document provides an introduction to the Metafacture Fix language (short: Metafix or Fix). The Fix language for Metafacture is introduced as an alternative to configuring data transformations with Metamorph. Inspired by Catmandu Fix, Metafix processes metadata not as a continuous data stream but as discrete records.
```

## Part of a metafacture worflow

> Metafacture Fix is a transformation module that can be used in a workflow, for this you have to use this in your pipeline:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metafacture Fix is a transformation module that can be used in a workflow. A workflow, also called "Flux", consists of modules that are piped together with other modules. Here is an example:
```

Flux-Example:
```PERL
   infile
   | open-file
   | as-lines
   | decode-marc21
   | fix(FLUX_DIR + "fixFile.fix")
   | encode-json
   | print
   ;
```

- when using the FLUX: 
- - address the `fix`-module
- - you can add variables

> - - there are some optiones available

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- - some modules have options available
```

Author: This relates to the fix command only, but I deleted this line.

- - The fix-Transformation can be part of the FLUX `|fix("retain(`245??`)")` - usually useful for short fixes

> - - or it can be separated in a external file, that is called in the FLUX-Process as in the code-snipped above

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- - or it can be separated in a external file, that is called in the FLUX-Process as in the code snippet above
```

> - when using it in a JAVA-Process, just add the library to your process

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- when using it in a Java process, just add the library to your process
```

## Record-based and metadata manipulating approach

> While Metafature processes the data as a stream, the fix module does not it buffers the incoming stream to distinct records.

Reviewer 3: Missing comma: While Metafature processes the data as a stream, the fix module does not, it buffers the incoming stream to distinct records.

> So that you can manipulate all metadata-elements of a record at once and without focussing about the order of the incoming stream - which was a really big hassle in the stream-based MORPH.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thus you can manipulate all metadata-elements of a record at once and don't need to think about the order of the incoming stream - which was a really big hassle in the stream-based MORPH.
```

> So that you can manipulate all metadata-elements of a record at once and without focussing about the order of the incoming stream - which was a really big hassle in the stream-based MORPH.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So that you can manipulate all metadata elements of a record at once and without focussing about the order of the incoming stream - which was a really big hassle in the stream-based MORPH.
```

> The incoming record then can be manipulated, fields can be changed, removed or added. This also differs from the approach in MORPH where you construct a new record and a new data stream, whereas you change stuff in the record in FIX and "only" change the data stream in Metafacture.

Reviewer 2: "whereas you change stuff in the record in FIX and "only" change the data stream in Metafacture." I don't understand this.

## Basic concepts
The four main concepts of FIX (introduced by catmandu) are [functions](https://librecat.org/Catmandu/#functions), [selector](https://librecat.org/Catmandu/#selectors), [conditionals](https://librecat.org/Catmandu/#conditionals) and [binds](https://librecat.org/Catmandu/#binds). The following code snippet shows examples of eachs of these concepts:

```PERL

# Simple fix function

add_field("hello", "world")
remove_field("my.deep.nested.junk")
copy_field("stats", "output.$append")

# Conditionals

if exists("error")
  set_field("is_valid", "no")
  log("error")
elsif exists("warning")
  set_field("is_valid", "yes")
  log("warning")
else
  set_field("is_valid", "yes")
end

# Binds - Loops

do list(path: "foo", "var": "$i")
  add_field("$i.bar", "baz")
end

# Selector
if exists("error")
   reject()
end

```

**Functions** are used to add, change, remove or otherwise manipulate elements.

**Conditionals** are used to control the processing of function so that they are not process with every workflow but only under certain conditions.

> **Selectors** can be used as hghlevel filter to filter the records you want.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Selectors** can be used to filter the records you want.
```

**Binds** are wrappers for one or more fixes. They give extra control functionality for fixes such as loops.
All binds have the same syntax:

```PERL
do Bind(params,…)
   fix(..)
   fix(..)
end
```

> Find here a [list of all function, selectors, binds and conditionals](/Fix-function-and-Cookbook.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Find here a [list of all functions, selectors, binds and conditionals](/Fix-function-and-Cookbook.md).
```

> ## Addressing Pieces of Data - of: FIX-Path and the record structure in FIX

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Addressing Pieces of Data: FIX-Path and the record structure in FIX
```

> Internally FIX knows arrays, objects/hashes and simple elements. How a format is translated is depending on the `decode-...` command in the MF Workflow. Only one thing is specific to the fix, as in Catmandu a repeated field is translated into a list depending on the real input data of the single record and elements with the suffix `[]` are interpreted as arrays.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Internally FIX knows arrays, objects/hashes and simple elements. How a format is translated depends on the `decode-...` command in the MF Workflow. Only one thing is specific to the fix, as in Catmandu: a repeated field is translated into a list depending on the real input data of the single record. Elements with the suffix `[]` are interpreted as arrays.
```

> Since function manipulate, add or remove elements in a record, it is essential to understand the way on can adress source or target elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since functions manipulate, add or remove elements in a record, it is essential to understand the way you can address source or target elements.
```

e.g.:
```PERL
copy_field("<sourceField>", "<targetField>")
```

> To adress the source or target element here, you need to provide the path to the element.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To address the source or target element here, you need to provide the path to the element.
```

> Metafacture Fix is using a path-syntax that is JSON Path like but not identical. It also uses the dot notation but there are some differences with the path structure of arrays and repeated fields. Especially when working with JSON, YAML or records repeated fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metafacture Fix uses a path syntax that is JSON-Path-like but not identical. It also uses the dot notation but there are some differences with the path structure of arrays and repeated fields. Especially when working with JSON, YAML, or records with repeated fields.
```

```
a : simpleField
b : c : objectField1
   d : objectField2
   e : objectField3
f : repeatedField1
f : repeatedField2
f : repeatedField3
g : - listElement1
   - listElement2
   - listElement3
h : - i : listObjectElement1.1
      j : listObjectElement1.2
    - i : listObjectElement2.1
      j : listObjectElement2.2
k : l : m : o : deepNestedField
```

> The path for a simple string-element is adressed by stating the element name: `a`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The path for a simple string element is addressed by stating the element name: `a`
```

For the fields with deeper structure you add a dot ‘.’. The path for elements in nested objects is stated by: `b.c` or `k.l.m.o`

> In an data set an element sometimes an element can have multiple instances. Different data models solve this possibility differently. XML-Records can have all elements multiple times, element repition is possible and in many schemas (partly) allowed. Repeatable elements also exist in JSON and YAML but are unusual.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes an element can have multiple instances. Different data models solve this possibility differently. In XML records element repetition is possible and (partly) allowed in many schemas. Repeatable elements also exist in JSON and YAML but are unusual.
```

> To point to a specific element you state the index number. To adress the value `repeatedField2` the path would be `f.2`` since the repeated field is handled as list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To point to a specific element you state the index number. To adress the value `repeatedField2` the path would be `f.2`` since the repeated field is handled as a list.
```

> Similar you adress the `listElement3` of the array/list by `g[].3`. The brackets are an array indicator created by the flux command decode-yaml. It helps to interpret an element as array also if the list has only on value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly you address the `listElement3` of the array/list by `g[].3`. The brackets are an array indicator created by the flux command decode-yaml. It helps to interpret an element as array even if the list has only on value.
```

> Similar you adress the `listElement3` of the array/list by `g[].3`. The brackets are an array indicator created by the flux command decode-yaml. It helps to interpret an element as array also if the list has only on value.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similarly you address the `listElement3` of the array/list by `g[].3`. The brackets are an array indicator created by the flux command `decode-yaml`. It helps to interpret an element as an array even if the list has only one value.
```

> Working with nested structures and combination of arrays and objects the path is a combination of element names, dots and index numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When working with nested structures and combinations of arrays and objects the path is a combination of element names, dots and index numbers.
```

> `listObjectElement2.2` has the path: `h[].2.j`

Reviewer: j?

Author: There are subfield i and j in the pseudo record.

> You do not only need the path name for your source element but also if you want to create a new element. But remember that fix as in catmandu is using repeated fields and arrays as lists so if you want to create a repeated field you have to create an array without suffic [].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You do not only need the path name for your source element but also if you want to create a new element. But remember that fix, as in catmandu, is using repeated fields and arrays as lists so if you want to create a repeated field you have to create an array without suffix [].
```

e.g.:
```PERL
copy_field("a", "z.y.x")
```

This would copy the value of z in a nested object:

```
z : 
   y: 
      x : simpleField
```

> To adress paths you can use wildcards. For instance the star-wildcard: `person*` would match all simple literals with element names starting with 'person': 'person\_name', 'person\_age', etc.

Reviewer 3: "address"

> Apart from the star-wildcard, the questionmark-wildcard ('?') is supported. It matches exactly one arbitrary character.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apart from the `*` wildcard, the `?` wildcard is supported. It matches exactly one arbitrary character.
```

> Not fully supported yet is alteration of pathes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not fully supported yet is alternation of paths.
```

But what exactly is / is not supported?

Author: You can alternate `parentElement1|parentElement2`
but not `parentElement1.subElement1|parentElement2.subElement1`
or `parentElement1.(subElement1|subElement2)`

> Besides path wildcards there are array/list wildcards that are used to refrence specific elements or all elements in an array. `g[].*` adresses all strings in the array `g[]`. `g[].$append` would refrence a new element in the array at the end of the array. `g[].$last` refrences the last element in an array.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides path wildcards there are array/list wildcards that are used to reference specific elements or all elements in an array. `g[].*` addresses all strings in the array `g[]`. `g[].$append` would reference a new element in the array at the end of the array. `g[].$last` references the last element in an array.
```

## Cleaning up the transformation

> Since FIX is not constructing a new record stream but is manipulating the existing record you usually clean up after you transform the data. There are functions to kick out all unnecessary elements an kick out all empty elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since FIX is not constructing a new record stream but is manipulating the existing record you usually clean up after you transform the data. There are functions to remove all unnecessary elements and to remove all empty elements.
```

> e.g.: if you transform MARC21 to JSON but you want to keep only certain elements that you created. you state them in a retain function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
e.g.: if you transform MARC21 to JSON but you want to keep only certain elements that you created, you state them in a `retain` function:
```

```
retain("all",

>    element",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   elements",
```

   "that",
   "I",
   "want")
```

> This function only keeps all the elements that I wanted. At the moment this only works with highlevel elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This function only keeps all the elements that I wanted. At the moment this only works with top-level elements.
```

> `vacuum()` deletes all emtpy elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`vacuum()` deletes all empty elements.
```

## Defining Macros

Macros can be defined with the `put_macro`-Bind and use the same parameter
mechanism later. 
Macros are called with the `call_macro` function. Attributes
of the function are used as parameters:

```PERL
do put_macro("concat-up")
   set_array("$[target_field]")
   copy_field("$[source_field]","$[target_field].$append")
   case("$[target_field].*")
   join_field("$[target_field]",", ")
end

   
call_macro("concat-up", source_field:"data1", target_field:"Data1")
call_macro("concat-up", source_field:"data2", target_field:"Data2")
``````

> In this case `target_field` and `source_field` serve as a parameter (the name is arbitrary). In the macro definition itsel, the parameters are addressed by `$[target_field]` and `$[source_field]`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case `target_field` and `source_field` serve as a parameter (the name is arbitrary). In the macro definition itself, the parameters are addressed by `$[target_field]` and `$[source_field]`. 
```

Parameters are scoped, which means that the ones provided with the `call_macro` function shadow global ones. Macros cannot be nested.

> ## Parameters to Metamorph Definitions / Using variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Parameters to Fix definitions / Using variables
```

Fix definitions may contain parameters. They follow the pattern `$[NAME]`:

```perl
add_field("rights","$[rights]")
```

`$[rights]` in this case is a compile-time variable which is evaluated on
creation of the respective Fix object.

The `<vars>` section in the Metamorph definition can be used to set defaults:

```xml
<vars>
   <var name="rights" value="CC0" />
</vars>
```

> For Java implementations: Compile-time variable are passed to Fix as a constructor parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Java implementations: Compile-time variables are passed to Fix as a constructor parameter.
```

```java
final Map<String, String> vars = new HashMap<String, String>();
vars.put("rights", "CC-0");

final Metafix metafix = new metafix("fixdef.fix", vars);
```

## Splitting Fixes for Reuse

In a complex project setting there may be several Fixes in use,
and it is likely that they share common parts. Imagine for instance a

> transformations from Marc 21 record holding data on books to RDF, and Marc 21

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transformations from Marc 21 records holding data on books to RDF, and Marc 21
```

> records hodling data on authors to RDF. Both make use of a table assinging

Reviewer: ```suggestion
records holding data on authors to RDF. Both make use of a table assigning
```

country names to ISO country codes. Such a table should only exist once. 

Another scenario would be to reduce the size of a single fix file and create several fix files used for different purposes.

To accomodate for such reuse, Fix offers an include mechanism:

``````
# Setup adds maps, macros and vars once
do once("setup")
  include ("./fix/maps.fix")
  include ("./fix/macros.fix")
  put_var("member", "-")
end
```

> For perfomance reason it is useful to integrate macros and maps that are used often in an do once bind.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For performance reasons it is useful to integrate macros and maps that are used often in a `do once` bind.
```
